Many people use Ruby in their daily jobs. Others just as a hobby. Here you'll find a small sample of real world usage of Ruby.


h4. Simulations

* "NASA Langley Research Center":http://www.larc.nasa.gov/ uses Ruby to conduct simulations.

* A research group in "Motorola":http://www.motorola.com uses Ruby to script a simulator, both to generate scenarios and to post process the data.

h4. 3D Modeling

* "Google SketchUp":http://www.sketchup.com/ is a 3D modeling application that uses Ruby for its macro scripting API.

h4. Business

* "Toronto Rehab":http://www.torontorehab.on.ca/ uses a RubyWebDialogs based app to manage and track on-call and on-site support for the IT help desk and IT operations teams.

h4. Robotics

* At "MORPHA":http://www.morpha.de/php_e/ project, Ruby was used to implemented the reactive control part for the Siemens service robot.

h4. Networking

* "Open Domain Server":http://ods.org/ uses Ruby to allow people using Dynamic DNS clients to update in real time their IP configuration so that it can be mapped to static domains.

h4. Telephony

* Ruby is being used within "Lucent":http://www.lucent.com/ on a 3G wireless telephony product.

h4. System Administration

* Ruby was used to write the central data collection portion of "Level 3 Communications":http://www.level3.com/ Unix Capacity and Planning system that gathers performance statistics from over 1700 Unix (Solaris and Linux) servers scattered around the globe.

h4. Web Applications

* "Basecamp":http://www.basecamphq.com, a web-based project management application developed by "37signals":http://www.37signals.com, is programmed entirely in Ruby.

* "43 Things":http://www.43things.com allows you to keep a list of goals and share it with the world. It was developed entirely in Ruby.

* "A List Apart":http://www.alistapart.com, a magazine for people who make websites that has been around since 1997, has recently been revamped and uses a custom application built with Ruby on Rails.

* "Blue Sequence":http://www.bluefountain.com/casestudies/bfs-deliver-a-2nd-sequence-production-system-for-toyota/, a sophisticated mission-critical application which forms part of Toyota Motor Manufacturing's own "sequence-in-time" production process, has recently been selected as finalist the British Computer (BCS) Information Management Awards.
